



OPSAWG                                                       J. Quilbeuf
Internet-Draft                                                 B. Claise
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Huawei
Expires: 17 March 2023                                 13 September 2022


           External Transaction ID for Configuration Tracing

Abstract

   Network equipments are often configured by a variety of network
   management systems (NMS), protocols, and people.  If a network issue
   arises because of a wrong configuration modification, it's important
   to quickly identify the specific service request and obtain the
   reason for pushing that modification.  Another potential network
   issue can stem from concurrent NMS's with overlapping intent, each
   having their own tasks to perform: in such a case, it's important to
   map the respective modifications to its originating NMS.  This
   document specifies a mechanism to automatically map the configuration
   modifications to their source, up to a specific NMS service request,
   in the context of NETCONF.  Such a mechanism is required for
   autonomous networks, to trace the reason of a particular
   configuration change that lead to an anomaly detection or a broken
   SLA.  This mechanism facilitates the troubleshooting, the post mortem
   analysis, and in the end the closed loop automation required for
   self-healing networks.  The specifications contain a new YANG module
   mapping a local configuration change to the corresponding northbound
   transaction, up to the controller or even the orchestrator.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/JeanQuilbeufHuawei/draft-collected-data-manifest.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.






Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 17 March 2023.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Relying on Transaction-id to Trace Configuration
           Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Use cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.1.1.  Configuration Mistakes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.1.2.  Concurrent NMS Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.1.3.  Conflicting Intents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Populating the YANG module  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.3.  Using the YANG module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  YANG module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.2.  YANG module ietf-external-transaction-id  . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  Open Issues / TODO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   10. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Appendix A.  Changes between revisions  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Appendix B.  Tracing configuration changes  . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12





Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


1.  Introduction

   Issues arising in the network, for instance violation of some SLAs,
   might be due to some configuration modification.  In the context of
   automated networks, the software needs not only to identify and
   revert the problematic configuration modification, but also to make
   sure that it won't happen again and that the fix will not disrupt
   other services.  To cover the last two points, it is imperative to
   understand the cause of the problematic configuration change.
   Indeed, the first point, making sure that the configuration
   modification will not be repeated, cannot be ensured if the cause for
   pushing the modification in the first place is not known.  Ensuring
   the second point, not disrupting other services, requires as well
   knowing if the configuration modification was pushed in order to
   support new services.  Therefore, we need to be able to trace a
   configuration modification on a device back to the reason that
   triggered that modification, for instance in a NMS, whether the
   controller or the orchestrator.

   In this document, we focus only on configuration pushed via NETCONF
   [RFC6241].  The rationale for this choice is that NETCONF is better
   suited for normalization than other protocols (SNMP, CLI), notably
   because the notion of transaction ID
   [I-D.lindblad-netconf-transaction-id] from RESTCONF [RFC8040] already
   exists to track configuration changes.  The same network element, or
   NETCONF [RFC6241] server, can be configured by different NMSs or
   NETCONF clients.  If an issue arises, one of the starting points for
   investigation is the configuration modification on the devices
   supporting the impacted service.  In the best case, there is a
   dedicated user for each client and the timestamp of the modification
   allows tracing the problematic modification to its cause.  In the
   worst case, everything is done by the same user and some more tricks
   must be done to trace the problematic modification to its source.


















Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


   This document specifies a mechanism to automatically map the
   configuration modifications to their source, up to a specific NMS
   service request.  Practically, this mechanism annotates configuration
   changes on the configured element with sufficient information to
   unambiguously identify the corresponding transaction, if any, on the
   element that requested the configuration modification.  It reuses the
   concept of a NETCONF transaction ID from
   [I-D.lindblad-netconf-transaction-id] and augment it with an ID for
   the client.  The information needed to do the actual configuration
   tracing is stored in a new YANG module that maps a local
   configuration change to the corresponding northbound transaction, up
   to the controller or even the orchestrator.  In case of a controller,
   the local configuration modification ID to both corresponding north-
   and southbound transaction ID.  Additionally, for northbound
   transactions, we store the ID of the client.

   TODO announce plan

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document uses the terms client and server from [RFC6241].

   This document uses the terms transaction and transaction id from
   [I-D.lindblad-netconf-transaction-id].

   TODO: define or reuse existing definitions

   *  orchestrator

   *  controller

   *  network equipment

   *  commit (configuration), or equivalent

   *  NMS

3.  Relying on Transaction-id to Trace Configuration Modifications







Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


3.1.  Use cases

   This document was written with autonomous networks in mind.  We
   assume that an existing system monitoring or assurance system, such
   as described in [I-D.ietf-opsawg-service-assurance-architecture], is
   able to detect and report network anomalies , e.g.  SLA violations,
   intent violations, network failure, or simply a customer issue.  Here
   are the use cases for the proposed YANG module.

3.1.1.  Configuration Mistakes

   Taking into account that many network anomalies are due to
   configuration mistakes, this mechanism allows to find out whether the
   offending configuration modification was triggered by a tracing-
   enabled client/NMS.  In such as case, we can map the offending
   configuration modification id on a server/NE to a local configuration
   modification id on the client/NMS.  Assuming that this mechanism (the
   YANG module) is implemented on the controller, we can recursively
   find, in the orchestrator, the latest (set of of) service request(s)
   that triggered the configuration modification.  Whether this/those
   service request(s) are actually the root cause needs to be
   investigated.  However, they are a good starting point for
   troubleshooting, post mortem analysis, and in the end the closed loop
   automation, which is absolutely required for for self-healing
   networks.

3.1.2.  Concurrent NMS Configuration

   Building on the previous use case is the situation where two NMS',
   unaware of the each other, configuring routers, each believing that
   they are the only NMS for specific device.  So one configuration
   executed by the NMS1 is overwritten by the NMS2, which in turn is
   overwritten by NMS1, etc.

3.1.3.  Conflicting Intents

   Autonomous networks will be solved first by assuring intent per
   specific domain for example data center, core, cloud, etc.  This last
   use case is a more specific "Concurrent NMS configuration" use case
   where assuring domain intent breaks the entire end to end service,
   even if the domain-specific controllers are aware of each other.  For
   example, ...









Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


3.2.  Populating the YANG module

   In [I-D.lindblad-netconf-transaction-id], the concept of a NETCONF
   transaction ID is proposed, to match the same mechanism from RESTCONF
   [RFC8040].  The goal of this document is to speed up the re-
   synchronization process between a client and a server, by using a
   common transaction ID.  If the current transaction ID on the server
   is the same as the transaction ID known by the client, then both are
   synchronized.  Otherwise, the client has to fetch again the
   configuration.  The transaction ID can be applied to the whole
   configuration or to so-called versioned nodes.  In the latter case,
   only versioned nodes for which the transaction ID differs need to be
   updated.

   Our proposed solution is to store, on the server, a mapping between
   the existing local commit id and the northbound and southbound
   transactions related to that local configuration change.  The mapping
   is read only and populated by the server at configuration time as
   follows:

   *  Northbound transaction: If the server is configured by a client
      that supports configuration tracing, the client MUST send a
      transaction-ID and its own ID.  The server stores both entries as
      respectively northbound transaction ID and northbound client ID,
      associated to the local configuration ID.  If the client does not
      support configuration tracing, none of these entries are
      populated.

   *  Southbound transaction: If the server has to configure some other
      servers in response to a local configuration change, then it MUST
      generate a transaction ID, send it along with its ID to the
      configured servers, and save it as a southbound transaction ID.
      Or, if the configured NETCONF server do not support being
      configured with transaction ID, it MUST record the transaction ID
      resulting of the configuration of each server.

   The two cases above are not mutually exclusive.  A Controller can be
   configured by an Orchestrator and configure network equipment in
   turn.  In that case, both the northbound transaction ID, shared with
   the Orchestrator and the southbound transaction IDs, shared with the
   network equipments, are stored in the Controller.  They are both
   associated to the corresponding configuration commit in the
   Controller.








Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


3.3.  Using the YANG module

   The YANG module defined below enables tracing a configuration change
   in a Network Equipment back to its origin, for instance a service
   request in an orchestrator.  To do so, the software doing the tracing
   should have for each NMS ID (as stored in northbound-client-id),
   access to some credentials enabling read access to the model.  It
   should as well have access to the network equipment in which an issue
   is detected.

   1.  Identify the commit id that created an issue.  This step is not
       defined here, we assume that the software is able to do it.

   2.  The software queries the NE for the northbound transaction-id and
       NMS id associated to the commit-id from step 1.  If they are no
       results, or no associated northbound-transaction-id, the change
       was not done by NMS compatible with the present draft, and the
       investigation stops here (first use case).

   3.  Otherwise, queries the NMS identified by the northbound-client-id
       found at the previous step, looking for matching for the
       northbound-transaction-id from the previous step with a
       southbound-transaction-id in the NMS.  (Second use case)

   4.  From that query, the software knows the local-commit-id on the
       NMS.  If the local-commit-id is associated to a northbound-
       transaction-id, the software restarts at step 3.

   5.  Finally, the local-commit-id points to the changes in topmost NMS
       that eventually triggered the problematic configuration in the
       network equipment.  These changes are now available for further
       manual or automated analysis, such as analyzing the root cause of
       the issue.

4.  YANG module

   We present in this section the YANG module for modelling the
   information about the configuration modifications.

4.1.  Overview

   The tree representation [RFC8340] of our YANG module is depicted in
   Figure 1








Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


   module: ietf-external-transaction-id
     +--ro external-transactions-id
        +--ro configuration-change* [local-commit-id]
           +--ro local-commit-id              string
           +--ro northbound-transaction-id?   ietf-netconf-txid:etag-t
           +--ro northbound-client-id         string
           +--ro southbound-transaction-id*   ietf-netconf-txid:etag-t


       Figure 1: Tree representation of ietf-external-transaction-id
                                YANG module

   The local-commit-id represents the local id of the configuration
   changes.  It can be used to retrieve the local configuration changes
   that happened during that transaction.

   The northbound-transaction-id should be present when the server is
   configured by a client supporting the external transaction ID.  In
   that case, the northbound-client-id is mandatory.  The value of both
   fields are sent by the client whenever it sends the configuration
   that trigger the changes associated to the local-commit-id.

   The southbound-transaction-id should be present when the current
   configuration change leads to the configuration of other devices.  In
   that case, the southbound-transaction-id should be generated by the
   server (and unique among other southbound-transaction-id fields
   generated on this server), sent to the configured devices and saved
   in that field.  If the configured server do not support having a
   forced transaction id, then the transaction IDs resulting of the
   configuration of the servers must be stored in that list.

   The use cases defined in Section 3.1 are not specific to NETCONF and
   the mechanism described in this document could be adapted to other
   configuration mechanisms.  For instance, a configuration modification
   pushed via CLI can be identified via a label.  As such cases are
   difficult to standardize, we won't cover them in this document.
   However, our model could be extended to support such mechanism for
   instance by using a configuration label instead of the northbound
   transaction ID.

4.2.  YANG module ietf-external-transaction-id

   <CODE BEGINS> file "ietf-external-transaction-id@2021-11-03.yang"
   module ietf-external-transaction-id {
     yang-version 1.1;
     namespace
       "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-external-transaction-id";
     prefix ext-txid;



Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


     import ietf-netconf-txid {
       prefix ietf-netconf-txid;
     }

     organization
       "IETF OPSAWG Working Group";
     contact
       "WG Web:   <https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/opsawg/>
        WG List:  <mailto:opsawg@ietf.org>
        Author:   Benoit Claise  <mailto:benoit.claise@huawei.com>
        Author:   Jean Quilbeuf  <mailto:jean.quilbeuf@huawei.com>";
     description
       "This module enable tracing of configuration changes in an
        automated network. It stores the ID of the northbound
        transaction when the local device is configured by an enabled
        NMS, and the southbound transaction ID when the local device
        configures other devices.

        The main usage of this module is to map a local configuration
        change to a northbound transaction ID that can be retrieved as
        southbound transaction ID on the configuring NMS, or to map a
        southbound transaction ID to a northbound transaction ID on
        devices that are both configured and configuring other devices.

        The key words 'MUST', 'MUST NOT', 'REQUIRED', 'SHALL',
        'SHALL NOT', 'SHOULD', 'SHOULD NOT', 'RECOMMENDED',
        'NOT RECOMMENDED', 'MAY', and 'OPTIONAL' in this document
        are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 (RFC 2119)
        (RFC 8174) when, and only when, they appear in all
        capitals, as shown here.

        Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
        authors of the code.  All rights reserved.

        Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
        without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject
        to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License
        set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
        Relating to IETF Documents
        (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
        This version of this YANG module is part of RFC XXXX; see the
        RFC itself for full legal notices.  ";

     revision 2021-11-03 {
       description
         "Initial revision";
       reference
         "RFC xxxx: Title to be completed";



Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


     }

     container external-transactions-id {
       config false;
       description
         "Contains the IDs of configuration transactions that are
          external to the current device.";
       list configuration-change {
         key "local-commit-id";
         description
           "List of configuration changes, identified by their
            local-commit-id";
         leaf local-commit-id {
           type string;
           description
             "Id as saved by the server. Can be used to retrieve
              the corresponding changes using the server mechanism
              if available.";
         }
         leaf northbound-transaction-id {
           type ietf-netconf-txid:etag-t;
           description
             "External transaction ID, sent by the client, corresponding
              to a change initiated by a northbound NMS. There should be
              a corresponding entry on the NMS as a
              southbound-transaction-id that maps to the actual
              configuration commit that triggered the configuration of
              this server.

              This field is present only when the configuration was
              pushed by a compatible system.";
         }
         leaf northbound-client-id {
           when '../northbound-transaction-id';
           type string;
           mandatory true;
           description
             "ID of the client doing the modification, to further query
              information about the corresponding change.";
         }
         leaf-list southbound-transaction-id {
           type ietf-netconf-txid:etag-t;
           description
             "Transaction ID transmitted to southbound devices
              configured following the configuration change
              corresponding to local-commit-id. ";
         }
       }



Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

5.  Security Considerations

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request to IANA.

7.  Contributors

8.  Open Issues / TODO

   *  A given commit can actually contain several transaction IDs, so we
      probably need to update the model in order to support that.  It's
      also a question of which interface we open for the software to
      find the issue.  If that software can work with versioned nodes
      then it could identify a specific transaction id, rather than the
      local commit id.  We won't consider that case as it is bad
      practice to modify a shared datastore without committing.

   *  Schema describing the configuration of a NE

   *  Schema describing the configuration of a Controller that further
      configures a NE

   *  Schema describing the configuration of a Controller that further
      configures a NE

9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC6241]  Enns, R., Ed., Bjorklund, M., Ed., Schoenwaelder, J., Ed.,
              and A. Bierman, Ed., "Network Configuration Protocol
              (NETCONF)", RFC 6241, DOI 10.17487/RFC6241, June 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6241>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.






Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Configuration Tracing via tx-id      September 2022


   [RFC8340]  Bjorklund, M. and L. Berger, Ed., "YANG Tree Diagrams",
              BCP 215, RFC 8340, DOI 10.17487/RFC8340, March 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8340>.

10.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-opsawg-service-assurance-architecture]
              Claise, B., Quilbeuf, J., Lopez, D. R., Voyer, D., and T.
              Arumugam, "Service Assurance for Intent-based Networking
              Architecture", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-opsawg-service-assurance-architecture-08, 11 August
              2022, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-opsawg-
              service-assurance-architecture-08.txt>.

   [I-D.lindblad-netconf-transaction-id]
              Lindblad, J., "Transaction ID Mechanism for NETCONF", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-lindblad-netconf-
              transaction-id-02, 8 June 2022,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-lindblad-netconf-
              transaction-id-02.txt>.

   [RFC8040]  Bierman, A., Bjorklund, M., and K. Watsen, "RESTCONF
              Protocol", RFC 8040, DOI 10.17487/RFC8040, January 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8040>.

Appendix A.  Changes between revisions

   Initial version

Appendix B.  Tracing configuration changes

Acknowledgements

   ...

Authors' Addresses

   Jean Quilbeuf
   Huawei

   Email: jean.quilbeuf@huawei.com


   Benoit Claise
   Huawei

   Email: benoit.claise@huawei.com




Quilbeuf & Claise         Expires 17 March 2023                [Page 12]
